docs(async): Rework async education (#1176)
pmndrs/jotai: docs/guides/async.mdx

---
title: Async
description: This doc describes about the behavior with async.
nav: 1.03
---

Using async atoms, you gain access to real-world data while still managing them directly from your atoms and with incredible ease.

We can seperate them in two main categories:

- Async read atoms: async request is started instantly as soon as you try to get its value, you could relate to them as "smart getters"
- Async write atoms: async request is started at a specific moment, you could relate to them as "actions"

## Async read atom

The `read` function of an atom can return a promise.

```js
const countAtom = atom(1)
const asyncAtom = atom(async (get) => get(countAtom) * 2)
```

Jotai is inherently leveraging `Suspense` to handle asynchronous flows.

```jsx
const ComponentUsingAsyncAtoms = () => {
  const [num] = useAtom(asyncAtom)
  // here `num` is always `number` even though asyncAtom returns a Promise
}
const App = () => {
  return (

>     <React.Suspense fallback={/* What to show while suspended */}>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <Suspense fallback={/* What to show while suspended */}>
```
Let's prefer shorter one. I don't think this confuse people too much.

      <ComponentUsingAsyncAtoms />
    </React.Suspense>
  )
}
```

Alternatively, you could avoid the inherent suspending that jotai does for you, by wrapping your atoms with the [`loadable` API](../utils/loadable.mdx).

**Note**: An atom becomes async not only if the atom read function is async,
but also if one or more of its dependencies are async.

```js
const anotherAtom = atom((get) => get(asyncAtom) / 2)
// even though this atom doesn't return a promise,
// it's a read async atom because `asyncAtom` is async.
```

> **Note**: You cannot get the value of an async atom in a write-atom (wether its async or not) before its value has been set

Reviewer: This only applies to derived atoms. primitive atoms such as `atom(1)` should be fine.

Author: @dai-shi I'm not sure I understand your statement.

To me, the error appears as soon as its an `async atom`, not `derived atom`
I was trying to talk about `async` atoms (`atom(1)` is not async).

Maybe there's something I'm missing?
Do you think I should remove this part?

Reviewer: Oh, you are right. I was confused with "async or not" part.
```suggestion
**Note**: You cannot get the value of an async atom in a write-atom (whether the write function is async or not) before its value has been resolved
```
